Read-Only JSON API Tutorial (#8521)
jekyll/jekyll: docs/_tutorials/read-only-json-api.md

---
title: Read-Only JSON API
author: izdwuut
date: 2020-12-23 10:04:00 +0100
---

> In this tutorial, you'll create a kind of a [REST](https://restfulapi.net/) [API](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/API) serving static [JSON](https://www.json.org/json-en.html) files generated from Markdown posts in your Jekyll site.

Reviewer: @izdwuut Much better, thanks for updating :)

A huge inspiration to write this tutorial was a [post](https://forestry.io/blog/build-a-json-api-with-hugo/) written by [Régis Philibert](https://forestry.io/authors/r%C3%A9gis-philibert/). It's about doing the exact same thing in [Hugo](https://gohugo.io/).

I hope that this solution in Jekyll is elegant, too. You just need to define some [layouts]({% link _docs/layouts.md %}) and write a [plugin]({% link _docs/plugins.md %}) to convert your content to JSON. **Don't be afraid if you're not familiar with Ruby** --- the language that Jekyll is written in. It's similar to Python, and you'll get a hang of it quickly.

By the end of the tutorial, you'll expose the following API:
* `/` --- an index of all posts
* `/{url}` --- details of a post
* `/categories` --- an index of categories
* `/categories/{category}` --- an index of posts under a category

Let's dive in!

{: .note .info}

> This solution needs a custom environment to support the Ruby code. This means that you can't host the site on GitHub Pages as-is - you'd need to use [Actions]({% link _docs/continuous-integration/github-actions.md %}) to deploy your site. First, see if a simpler [solution](https://gist.github.com/MichaelCurrin/f8d908596276bdbb2044f04c352cb7c7) created by [Michael Currin](https://github.com/MichaelCurrin) fits your needs.

Reviewer: :+1:

```
.
├── site
│   ├── _layouts
│   │   ├── category.html
│   │   └── default.html
```

The last thing is to link the `default` layout in `config.yml`:

```yml
defaults:
  -
    scope:
      path: ""
    values:
      layout: "default"
```

Since you won't have any pages in your project, leave the `path` to `""` in order to [cover]({% link _docs/configuration/front-matter-defaults.md %}) every file.

## Convert Posts to JSON
My approach is a little hacky --- it requires you to specify a JSON output format in a HTML template. The only thing you miss is that your text editor will most probably not recognize the markup file as a properly formatted JSON document. 

### Define the Template
Before you do it, it's worth noting that you can list all the available properties with this little template, which returns an array of available keys:

{% raw %}
```liquid
{{ page.keys | jsonify }}
```
{% endraw %}

If you enter it in a `default.html` template and execute the following command:

```sh
bundle exec jekyll build
```

You'll get this in `/_site/update/2020/12/20/the-first-post.html`:

```json

> ["url","relative_path","excerpt","title","categories","path","next","previous","id","output","date","tags","content","collection","draft","layout","category","custom-property","slug","ext"]

Reviewer: Some wrapping for readability.

```suggestion
["url","relative_path","excerpt","title","categories","path","next",
"previous","id","output","date","tags","content","collection",
"draft","layout","category","custom-property","slug","ext"]
```

> Priority --- This flag determines what order the plugin is loaded in.

* `matches` --- a file extension to match. You target Markdown files, so it should match a filename `*.md`. Optionally, you could add `.markdown` etc.
* `output_ext` --- a method that returns an output extension --- `.json` in our case.
* `convert` --- a function that takes post content **transpiled into HTML** as an argument. Please note that it doesn't parse the file through a template.

### Remove Whitespaces

But, there's another trick. Using [hooks]({% link _docs/plugins/hooks.md %}), you can remove all whitespaces! Before a post is rendered, you can squeeze some custom logic in:

```ruby
Jekyll::Hooks.register :posts, :post_render do |post|
  post.output = JSON.generate(JSON.parse(post.output))
end
```

* Register for a `post_render` event owned by `posts`.
* With every post, parse the JSON layout you've defined before and generate a new JSON string from it. It will remove all whitespace characters for you.

After building the site, you'd get the following:

```json

> {"title":"The First Post","categories":["update"],"tags":[],"content":"<p>1</p>\n","collection":"posts","date":"2020-12-20 00:00:00 +0100","custom-property":"My custom property"}

Reviewer: ```suggestion
{"title":"The First Post","categories":["update"],"tags":[],
 "content":"<p>1</p>\n","collection":"posts",
 "date":"2020-12-20 00:00:00 +0100","custom-property":"My custom property"}
```

* Overwrite content with JSON generated from a [hash](https://ruby-doc.org/core-2.7.2/Hash.html) provided in the `data` argument.

### Generate Pages

The last class you'll write is a [generator]({% link _docs/plugins/generators.md %}) that creates listings for you. It's the last piece of code in this tutorial. It's rather lengthy, but really simple in principle:

```ruby
class ApiGenerator < Generator
  safe true
  priority :normal

  def generate(site)
    categories = {}
    posts = {}
    
    site.categories.each_key do |category|
      categories[category] = {}
      site.categories[category].each_entry do |post|
        if post.data['draft']
          continue
        end
        inserted_post = post.data.clone
        title = inserted_post['title']
        inserted_post.delete('draft')
        inserted_post.delete('ext')
        inserted_post.delete('title')
        inserted_post['url'] = post.url
        categories[category][title] = inserted_post
        posts[title] = inserted_post
      end
    end

    category_dir = site.config['category_dir'] || 'categories'
    site.categories.each_key do |category|

>       site.pages << ListingPage.new(site, site.source, File.join(category_dir, category), categories[category])

Reviewer: The code cuts off around `File.join`.

https://deploy-preview-8521--jekyllrb.netlify.app/tutorials/read-only-json-api/#generate-pages

```suggestion
      site.pages << ListingPage.new(site, site.source,
                                    File.join(category_dir, category), 
                                    categories[category])
```

Or

```ruby
foo.new(
  bar
  baz
  buzz
)
```

    end
    site.pages << ListingPage.new(site, site.source, "", posts)

>     site.pages << ListingPage.new(site, site.source, category_dir, categories.keys)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    site.pages << ListingPage.new(site, site.source, category_dir, 
                                  categories.keys)
```

---
title: Read-Only JSON API
author: izdwuut
date: 2020-12-23 10:04:00 +0100
---

> There shouldn't be a necessity to explain what is the [API](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/API). I assume that you've landed here to learn it in a context of Jekyll. Let's jump straight to the actual thing, shall we?

Reviewer: I think the tone and the info here can be improved to not presume to much and also to tell the reader in the first line what the article is going to create and why they should care.

e.g.

```
Here we take your posts markdown files in your Jekyll site and make them available as static JSON files on a kind of REST API. Then you can view them directly in the browser as `/foo.json` and you can use them in your frontend layer, such as if you have a JavaScript application on the frontend which pulls in JSON content.

We are using [JSON](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/JSON) is a popular cross-language method of transferring data on the web, without all the presentation and styling of HTML. The files we output will be available in a similar way to if you built a [REST](https://restfulapi.net/) [API](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/API) in a server-side language like Ruby, Python or Node. 
```

Author: Fixed. yeah, I agree that tone is unpleasant. It just that I've been too blunt about caring about the reader time.

A huge inspiration to write this tutorial was a [post](https://forestry.io/blog/build-a-json-api-with-hugo/) written by [Régis Philibert](https://forestry.io/authors/r%C3%A9gis-philibert/). It's about doing the exact same thing in [Hugo](https://gohugo.io/).

I hope that my solution in Jekyll is elegant, too. You just need to define some [layouts]({% link _docs/layouts.md %}) and write a [plugin]({% link _docs/plugins.md %}) to convert your content to JSON. **Don't be afraid if you're not familiar with Ruby** --- the language that Jekyll is written in. It's similar to Python, and you'll get a hang of it quickly.

By the end of the tutorial, you'll expose the following API:
* `/` --- an index of all posts
* `/{url}` --- details of a post
* `/categories` --- an index of categories
* `/categories/{category}` --- an index of posts under a category

Let's dive in!

---

# Setup

First, you need to go through an [installation]({% link _docs/installation.md %}) process. Having that, you can initialize a new Jekyll project. In your directory of choice, invoke the following:

```sh

> bundle init

Reviewer: Can you find a tutorial on the site that covers these steps already as a central source of truth? 

It is not nice to duplicate similar but slightly different setup steps across tutorials, as they don't follow a convention and they all have to be updated if a change is needed.

Instead of covering setup steps and things that the user _won't_ need in the Config section, could you just outline what the user _does_ need? 

e.g.

```
_layouts/
  post.html
_posts/
  2020-12-12-hello.html
index.md
_config.yml
```

Then they can use the jekyll new command if they want or create the files by hand.

Author: Fixed. You're right. It's better to define something once and reference it whenever possible.

bundle config set --local path 'vendor/bundle'
bundle add jekyll
bundle exec jekyll new --force --skip-bundle .
bundle install
```

* Initialize a new Ruby [bundle](https://bundler.io).
* Instruct Bundler to install dependencies locally.
* Add Jekyll as a dependency.
* Create a new scaffold for the project. 
* Install dependencies.

Now, you need to do some clean up. 

---

> # Configuration

Reviewer: Rather increase `#` to `##`. And existing `##` to `###`.

Having multiple H1 headings on an HTML page is not a good pattern for styling, accessibility and probably SEO. It is also not consistent with other pages like [navigation](https://raw.githubusercontent.com/jekyll/jekyll/1d4cff612bcfe28b5dc1be8331b6a47bc3b909f1/docs/_tutorials/navigation.md) tutorial which uses H2s, no H1 and doesn't use `---` to split sections.

Author: Done. Wasn't aware of that.

---
2
```

This one belongs to two categories --- `update` and `tutorial`, and doesn't include the custom property. Because the categories overlap, it will be possible to test getting a list of posts from a category.

You'll also need a couple of layouts. Just add these empty files for now --- you'll fill (one of) them later:

```
.
├── site
│   ├── _layouts
│   │   ├── category.html
│   │   └── default.html
```

The last thing is to link the `default` layout in `config.yml`:

```yml
defaults:
  -
    scope:
      path: ""
    values:
      layout: "default"
```

Since you won't have any pages in your project, leave the `path` to `""` in order to [cover]({% link _docs/configuration/front-matter-defaults.md %}) every file.

---

# Convert Posts to JSON
My approach is a little hacky --- it requires you to specify a JSON output format in a HTML template. The only thing you miss is that your text editor will most probably not recognize the markup file as a properly formatted JSON document. 

## Define the Template
Before you do it, it's worth noting that you can list all the available properties with this little template, which returns an array of available keys:

```liquid

> {% raw %}{{ page.keys | jsonify }}{% endraw %}

Reviewer: I don't know how other maintainers feel, but I find the code much easier to read and maintain by wrapping the entire file in `raw`.

```
---
---
{% raw %}

## Heading

content

...

Bottom of page

{% endraw %}
```

Author: Fixed. I agree, it's nicer, although I get a warning when I do it:

```
Excerpt modified in _tutorials/read-only-json-api.md!
Found a Liquid block containing the excerpt separator "\n\n". 
The block has been modified with the appropriate closing tag.
Feel free to define a custom excerpt or excerpt_separator in the
document's Front Matter if the generated excerpt is unsatisfactory.
```
Any idea how to resolve it? It's just a warning, but I feel that it should be addressed anyways.

Reviewer: Hmm I have used raw tag frequently including for an entire page and have not seen that warning before.

An excerpt is usually in the context of a post but I guess applies to this tutorial too. The excerpt is the first paragraph and it will have a blank line after it which is the \n\n

After rewriting the opening paragraph if you still get this warning you can try play around with whitespace. 

E.g.

```
---
---

{% raw %}
There is...
```

Or 

```
---
---
{% raw %}There
```
Or maybe just start the raw tag after the first paragraph.

```
---
---
First paragraph here

{% raw %}
Second paragraph and rest of tutorial here
...

{% endraw %}
```

Author: Starting the raw tag after the first paragraph fixed the warning. But, I noticed that because the whole post is wrapped in the tag, URLs to internal pages are not generated properly.

Reviewer: Sorry I should have checked on what would break before making the suggestion 

You'll have to use the raw tag throughout but I would recommend keeping it readable.

e.g. not squeezed in one line 

```
{% raw %}Text
```

And not this either before raw tag actually renders as an empty line

    ```liquid
    {% raw %}
    Text
    ```

But this should be good with raw on the outside.

    {% raw %}
    ```liquid
    Text

Author: Done.

---
title: Read-Only JSON API
author: izdwuut
date: 2020-12-23 10:04:00 +0100
plugin_disclaimer: true
---
In this tutorial, you'll create a kind of a [REST](https://restfulapi.net/) [API](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/API)
serving static [JSON](https://www.json.org/json-en.html) files generated from Markdown posts in your Jekyll site.

JSON is a popular cross-language method of transferring data on the web, without all the presentation layer of HTML.

> The files you output will be similar to a REST API in a server-side language like Ruby, Python or Node. You'll be able

Reviewer 2: "The files you output will be similar to a REST API in a server side language like Ruby, Python, or Node."

> to see them directly in the browser as `/foo.json`. They can be used to build a custom frontend using Angular, React,

Reviewer 2: Same as above.

"Angular, React, Vue, and so on"

Vue and so on.

A huge inspiration to write this tutorial was a [post](https://forestry.io/blog/build-a-json-api-with-hugo/) written
by [Régis Philibert](https://forestry.io/authors/r%C3%A9gis-philibert/). It's about doing the exact same thing in
[Hugo](https://gohugo.io/).

> I hope that this solution in Jekyll is elegant, too. You just need to define some [layouts]({% link _docs/layouts.md %})

Reviewer 2: "You will need to define a number of layouts and write a plugin to convert your content to JSON."

and write a [plugin]({% link _docs/plugins.md %}) to convert your content to JSON. **Don't be afraid if you're not

> familiar with Ruby** --- the language that Jekyll is written in. It's similar to Python, and you'll get a hang of it

Reviewer 2: "...you should get the hang of it quickly"

quickly.

By the end of the tutorial, you'll expose the following API:
* `/` --- an index of all posts
* `/{url}` --- details of a post
* `/categories` --- an index of categories
* `/categories/{category}` --- an index of posts under a category

Let's dive in!

> {: .note .info}

Reviewer 2: "...to support its Ruby code."

This solution needs a custom environment to support the Ruby code. This means that you can't host the site on GitHub
Pages as-is - you'd need to use [Actions]({% link _docs/continuous-integration/github-actions.md %}) to deploy your
site. First, see if a simpler [solution](https://gist.github.com/MichaelCurrin/f8d908596276bdbb2044f04c352cb7c7)
created by [Michael Currin](https://github.com/MichaelCurrin) fits your needs.

## Setup

> First, you need to go through an [installation]({% link _docs/installation.md %}) process. Having that, you can

Reviewer 2: "Having done that," etc. etc.

Reviewer 2: "invoking the command `bundle exec jekyll new`."

initialize a new Jekyll project by invoking `bundle exec jekyll new` command. Then you need to create the following
directory structure:

```
.
├── site
│   ├── config.yml
│   ├── _layouts
│   │   ├── category.html
│   │   └── default.html
│   ├── _plugins
│   │   └── api_generator.rb
│   ├── _posts
│   │   ├── 2020–12–20-the-first-post.md
│   │   └── 2020–12–20-the-second-post.md
```

Unless you self-host your site, **you can rely on a generic 404 response from your server**. You no longer need `index`

>  --- you will generate a custom one later. Generating pages like `about` is out of scope of this tutorial, but in case

Reviewer 2: "...out of scope for this tutorial"

you need them, they behave the same way that posts do.

> Under `_posts`, create two new documents. Remember that Jekyll requires you to **prepend post filename with a date**:

Reviewer 2: "post filenames"

`2020–12–20-the-first-post.md`

```md
---
title:  "The First Post"
category: update
custom-property: "My custom property"
---
1
```

> Please note that you include a `custom-property` that you will fetch later on. 

Reviewer 2: "Make sure to include a `custom-property` so you can fetch it later on"

`2020–12–20-the-second-post.md`

```md
---
title:  "The Second Post"
categories: ["update", "tutorial"]
---
2
```

> This one belongs to two categories --- `update` and `tutorial`, and doesn't include the custom property. Because the

Reviewer 2: "This one belongs to two categories  - `update` and `tutorial` - and doesn't include the custom property.

categories overlap, it will be possible to test getting a list of posts from a category.

You'll also need a couple of layouts. Just add these empty files for now --- you'll fill (one of) them later:

```
.
├── site
│   ├── _layouts
│   │   ├── category.html
│   │   └── default.html
```

The last thing is to link the `default` layout in `config.yml`:

```yml
defaults:
  -
    scope:
      path: ""
    values:
      layout: "default"
```

Since you won't have any pages in your project, leave the `path` to `""` in order to
[cover]({% link _docs/configuration/front-matter-defaults.md %}) every file.

## Convert Posts to JSON

> My approach is a little hacky --- it requires you to specify a JSON output format in a HTML template. The only thing

Reviewer 2: "...in an HTML template."

> you miss is that your text editor will most probably not recognize the markup file as a properly formatted JSON

Reviewer 2: "The only thing you will miss is that your text editor will probably not recognize the markup file as a properly formatted JSON document"

returns an array of available keys:

{% raw %}
```liquid
{{ page.keys | jsonify }}
```
{% endraw %}

If you enter it in a `default.html` template and execute the following command:

```sh
bundle exec jekyll build
```

You'll get this in `/_site/update/2020/12/20/the-first-post.html`:

```json
["url","relative_path","excerpt","title","categories","path","next",
 "previous","id","output","date","tags","content","collection",
 "draft","layout","category","custom-property","slug","ext"]
```

Given that, I'd like you to enter the following template instead of the aforementioned one-liner:

{% raw %}
```liquid
{
    "title": {{ page.title | jsonify }},
    "categories": {{ page.categories | jsonify }},
    "tags": {{ page.tags | jsonify }},
    "content": {{ page.content | markdownify | jsonify  }},
    "collection": {{ page.collection | jsonify }},
    "date": {{ page.date | jsonify }},
    "custom-property": {{ page.custom-property | jsonify }}
}
```
{% endraw %}

* Pass every property through a jsonify [filter]({% link _docs/liquid/filters.md %}#data-to-json). This will add

> quotation marks for us, convert arrays into strings and escape quotation marks.

Reviewer 2: "This will add quotation marks for us, convert arrays into strings, and escape quotation marks."

> * For content, turn Markdown-formatted string into HTML using [markdownify]({% link _docs/liquid/filters.md %}#markdownify)

Reviewer 2: "Markdown-formatted strings"

filter.

> * Fetch the falue of custom-property variable that you've defined earlier. If it doesn't exist on a post, a null value

Reviewer 2: "...the custom variable you defined earlier"

will be returned.

> If you enter `bundle exec jekyll build` command again, you'd get the following output:

Reviewer 2: "If you run `bundle exec jekyll build` again, you'll get the following  output:"

```json
{
    "title": "The First Post",
    "categories": ["update"],
    "tags": [],
    "content": "<p>1</p>\n",
    "collection": "posts",
    "date": "2020-12-20 00:00:00 +0100",
    "custom-property": "My custom property"
}
```

### Create the Plugin

> The rest of the work can be done using a custom plugin. For now, it only needs to convert the output file extension

Reviewer 2: "filename extension"

```ruby
module Jekyll
  class PostConverter < Converter
    safe true
    priority :low

    def matches(ext)
      ext =~ /^\.md$/i
    end

    def output_ext(ext)
      ".json"
    end

    def convert(content)
      content
    end
  end
end
```

* `Converter` --- a [class](https://www.rubydoc.info/github/jekyll/jekyll/Jekyll/Converter) that can handle
[conversion]({% link _docs/plugins/converters.md %}) from one output format to another.
* `safe` and `priority` --- as per [documentation]({% link _docs/plugins/your-first-plugin.md %}#flags):

> Safe --- A boolean flag that informs Jekyll whether this plugin may be safely executed in an environment where
arbitrary code execution is not allowed.

> Priority --- This flag determines what order the plugin is loaded in.

* `matches` --- a file extension to match. You target Markdown files, so it should match a filename `*.md`.
Optionally, you could add `.markdown` etc.
* `output_ext` --- a method that returns an output extension --- `.json` in our case.
* `convert` --- a function that takes post content **transpiled into HTML** as an argument. Please note that it
doesn't parse the file through a template.

> ### Remove Whitespaces

Reviewer 2: Remove Whitespace

> But, there's another trick. Using [hooks]({% link _docs/plugins/hooks.md %}), you can remove all whitespaces! Before a

Reviewer 2: "...all whitespace!"

> post is rendered, you can squeeze some custom logic in:

Reviewer 2: "squeeze" is awkward here, perhaps you you say "add" or something similar?

```ruby
Jekyll::Hooks.register :posts, :post_render do |post|
  post.output = JSON.generate(JSON.parse(post.output))
end
```

* Register for a `post_render` event owned by `posts`.
* With every post, parse the JSON layout you've defined before and generate a new JSON string from it. It will remove
all whitespace characters for you.

After building the site, you'd get the following:

```json
{"title":"The First Post","categories":["update"],"tags":[],
 "content":"<p>1</p>\n","collection":"posts",
 "date":"2020-12-20 00:00:00 +0100",
 "custom-property":"My custom property"}
```

## Generate Listings

The last step is to generate categories and an index of all posts.

### Define a Page

> In `api_generator.rb`, add the following class as a part of `Jekyll` module:

Reviewer 2: "...the `Jekyll` module"

```ruby
class ListingPage < Page
  def initialize(site, base, dir, data)
    @site = site
    @base = base
    @dir  = dir
    @name = 'index.json'

    self.process(@name)
    self.read_yaml(File.join(base, '_layouts'), 'category.html')
    self.content = JSON.generate(data)
  end
end
```

* [`Page`](https://www.rubydoc.info/github/jekyll/jekyll/Jekyll/Page) means that `ListingPage` represents a generated page.
* Override `initialize` method. According to the [documentation](https://www.rubydoc.info/github/jekyll/jekyll/Jekyll%2FPage:initialize):

> `site` - The Site object.
>
> `base` - The String path to the source.
>
> `dir` - The String path between the source and the file.
>
> `name` - The String filename of the file.

* Assign some [instance variables](https://www.ruby-lang.org/en/documentation/faq/8/) that Jekyll will utilize to
generate the page.
* Process the page filename. It will extract the extension and base name.

> * `read_yaml` is only needed to define some instance variable for us. It's just simpler than doing it by hand. You can

Reviewer 2: "instance variables"

"It's simpler than doing it by hand"

        inserted_post.delete('title')
        inserted_post['url'] = post.url
        categories[category][title] = inserted_post
        posts[title] = inserted_post
      end
    end

    category_dir = site.config['category_dir'] || 'categories'
    site.categories.each_key do |category|
      site.pages << ListingPage.new(site, site.source,
                                    File.join(category_dir, category),
                                    categories[category])
    end
    site.pages << ListingPage.new(site, site.source, "", posts)
    site.pages << ListingPage.new(site, site.source, category_dir,
                                  categories.keys)
  end
end
```

* There is only one method you have to implement --- `generate`.
* Iterate through every category and post.
* I opted for skipping on drafts, but you can choose to generate them as well.
* Clone the `post` and delete unused keys. If you'd like to see what fields are available, just enter `puts post` in
the inner loop and build the site.
* Assign a post URL.
* Insert the post to `categories` and `posts` hashes.
* Generate categories, categories index and the index of all posts (in that order)

> And that's it! If you hit `bundle exec jekyll build` again, you'd get the following output:

Reviewer 2: "you'll get the following output:"

static [JSON](https://www.json.org/json-en.html) files generated from Markdown posts in your Jekyll site.

JSON is a popular format to structure and exchange data on the web, without the presentation layer of HTML. The files you
output are similar to a REST API in a server-side language like Ruby, Python, or Node. You can access them directly in your
browser from e.g. `/foo.json`. They can be used to build a custom frontend using Angular, React, Vue, and so on.

A huge inspiration to write this tutorial was a [post](https://forestry.io/blog/build-a-json-api-with-hugo/) written by
[Régis Philibert](https://twitter.com/regisphilibert). It's about doing the exact same thing in [Hugo](https://gohugo.io/).

You will need to define a number of [layouts]({% link _docs/layouts.md %}) and write a [plugin]({% link _docs/plugins.md %})
to convert your content to JSON. **Don't be afraid if you're not familiar with Ruby** --- the language that Jekyll is
written in --- it can be learned quite quickly.

By the end of the tutorial, you'll expose the following API endpoints:
* `/` --- an index of all posts

> * `/{url}` --- details of a post
> * `/categories` --- an index of categories
> * `/categories/{category}` --- an index of posts under a category

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
* `/{url}/` --- details of a post
* `/categories/` --- an index of categories
* `/categories/{category}/` --- an index of posts under a category
```

since [AFAICT](https://stackoverflow.com/a/68562806/12916) you cannot get rid of the slash:

```console
$ curl -IL https://izdwuut.github.io/jekyll-json-api-tutorial/categories
HTTP/2 301 
server: GitHub.com
content-type: text/html
permissions-policy: interest-cohort=()
strict-transport-security: max-age=31556952
location: https://izdwuut.github.io/jekyll-json-api-tutorial/categories/
access-control-allow-origin: *
expires: Wed, 28 Jul 2021 15:46:05 GMT
cache-control: max-age=600
x-proxy-cache: MISS
x-github-request-id: A044:447C:5DE631:890EB7:61017965
accept-ranges: bytes
date: Wed, 28 Jul 2021 15:36:52 GMT
via: 1.1 varnish
age: 47
x-served-by: cache-fty21356-FTY
x-cache: HIT
x-cache-hits: 1
x-timer: S1627486612.323765,VS0,VE1
vary: Accept-Encoding
x-fastly-request-id: 18eb9201adfa28e4b3ee52de9c53090e57201a12
content-length: 162

HTTP/2 200 
server: GitHub.com
content-type: application/json; charset=utf-8
permissions-policy: interest-cohort=()
strict-transport-security: max-age=31556952
last-modified: Thu, 14 Jan 2021 11:45:10 GMT
access-control-allow-origin: *
etag: "60002ec6-15"
expires: Wed, 28 Jul 2021 15:45:47 GMT
cache-control: max-age=600
x-proxy-cache: MISS
x-github-request-id: 5514:447C:5DE3FF:890B33:61017953
accept-ranges: bytes
date: Wed, 28 Jul 2021 15:36:52 GMT
via: 1.1 varnish
age: 65
x-served-by: cache-fty21356-FTY
x-cache: HIT
x-cache-hits: 1
x-timer: S1627486612.347649,VS0,VE1
vary: Accept-Encoding
x-fastly-request-id: e56fa6c0ce7c97e157f7c7ab45c59c92e7fed259
content-length: 21
```

serving static [JSON](https://www.json.org/json-en.html) files generated from Markdown posts in your Jekyll site.

JSON is a popular format to structure and exchange data on the web, without all the presentation layer of HTML.
The files you output are similar to a REST API in a server side language like Ruby, Python, or Node. You
can access them directly in your browser from e.g. `/foo.json`. They can be used to build a custom frontend using Angular, React, 
Vue, and so on.

A huge inspiration to write this tutorial was a [post](https://forestry.io/blog/build-a-json-api-with-hugo/) written
by [Régis Philibert](https://twitter.com/regisphilibert). It's about doing the exact same thing in
[Hugo](https://gohugo.io/).

I hope that this solution in Jekyll is elegant, too. You will need to define a number of [layouts]({% link _docs/layouts.md %})
and write a [plugin]({% link _docs/plugins.md %}) to convert your content to JSON. **Don't be afraid if you're not
familiar with Ruby** --- the language that Jekyll is written in. It's similar to Python, and you should get a hang of it
quickly.

> By the end of the tutorial, you'll expose the following API:

Reviewer 2: "endpoints", no?

* `/` --- an index of all posts
* `/{url}` --- details of a post
* `/categories` --- an index of categories
* `/categories/{category}` --- an index of posts under a category

Let's dive in!

{: .note .info}

> This solution needs a custom environment to support its Ruby code. This means that you can't host the site on GitHub

Author: I updated this paragraph. I think it's less confusing now.

initialize a new Jekyll project by invoking the command `bundle exec jekyll new`. 

### Directories Structure

You need to create the following structure:

```
.
├── site
│   ├── config.yml
│   ├── _includes
│   │   └── post.html
│   ├── _layouts
│   │   ├── categories_index.html
│   │   ├── items_index.html
│   │   └── post.html
│   ├── _posts
│   │   ├── 2020–12–20-the-first-post.md
│   │   └── 2020–12–20-the-second-post.md
```

Unless you self-host your site, **you can rely on a generic 404 response from your server**. You no longer need `index`
 --- you will generate a custom one later. Generating pages like `about` is out of scope for this tutorial, but in case
you need them, they behave the same way that posts do.

### Dummy Posts

Under `_posts`, create two new documents. Remember that Jekyll requires you to **prepend post filenames with a date**:

`2020–12–20-the-first-post.md`

```md
---
title:  "The First Post"
category: update
custom-property: "My custom property"
---
1
```

Make sure to include a `custom-property` so that you can fetch it later on. 

`2020–12–20-the-second-post.md`

```md
---
title:  "The Second Post"
categories: ["update", "tutorial"]
---
2
```

> This one belongs to two categories --- `update` and `tutorial` --- and doesn't include the custom property. Because the

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
This post belongs to two categories --- `update` and `tutorial` --- and doesn't include the custom property. Because the
```

> categories overlap, it will be possible to test getting a list of posts from a category.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
categories overlap with that of the previous post, it will be possible to test getting a list of posts from a category.
```

### Layouts

> The last thing is to define the layouts. First, declare them in `config.yml`:

Reviewer 4: Too early to talk about doing *the last thing*. We haven't created the Ruby plugin yet.
Besides, using front matter defaults and new types will only be clear after the Ruby plugin has been implemented.

So it's best to move this section to the bottom.

Author: Done. I also made some changes to this section, so that it reflects the fact that it's the last thing I describe.

```yml
defaults:
  - scope:
      type: categories
    values:
      layout: items_index
      permalink: categories/:category/
  - scope:
      type: categories_index
    values:
      layout: categories_index
      permalink: categories/
  - scope:
      type: posts
    values:
      layout: post
  - scope:
      type: posts_index
    values:
      layout: items_index
```

> * You have four various content types: an index of all categories, a listing of all posts under a category, a 

Reviewer 4: Four various content types?
The `type` key doesn't denote *page content type*.

Since an index is a listing as well, using both terms here can be confusing. Either there are three listings or three indexes.

Author: I updated this line. Now I reference it as `scopes`, which I believe is more accurate.

listing of all posts in the system and a single post. 
* You specify a layout using a `layout` key.
* You will reference `type` when you'll start writing the plugin. For purposes of this tutorial, it's only 
required to be unique.
* For some of the items you declare permalink. You can do it for all of them. It can come in handy if you want to 
define your own API endpoints.

Now you can define them. Before you do it, it's worth noting that you can list all the available properties with this little template, which
returns an array of available keys:

{% raw %}
```liquid
{{ page.keys | jsonify }}
```
{% endraw %}

If you enter it in a `post.html` template and execute the following command:

```sh
bundle exec jekyll build
```

You'll get this in `/_site/update/2020/12/20/the-first-post.html`:

```json
["url","relative_path","excerpt","title","categories","path","next",
 "previous","id","output","date","tags","content","collection",
 "draft","layout","category","custom-property","slug","ext"]
```

> Given that, I'd like you to enter the following template:

Reviewer 4: The use of the term *enter* in this line and the previous ones is incorrect.
Conventionally, one is instructed *to enter a location* or *enter data into a document*.
*Entering a template* can therefore be misinterpreted.

Additionally, it is not clear where to insert the subsequent Liquid code..

{% raw %}
```liquid
{% include post.html post=page %}
```
{% endraw %}

* Include a partial template `post.html` from `_includes` directory. 
* Assign a value to internal `post` variable

Partial template `post.html` should look like this:

{% raw %}
```liquid
{

>     "title": {{ include.post.title | jsonify }},

Reviewer 4: what happens if one were to use `"title": {{ page.title | jsonify }}` instead?
`

Author: A listing of posts under a category would render with `null` values.

---
title: Read-Only JSON API
author: izdwuut
date: 2020-12-23 10:04:00 +0100
plugin_disclaimer: true
---
In this tutorial, you'll create a kind of a [REST](https://restfulapi.net/) [API](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/API)
serving static [JSON](https://www.json.org/json-en.html) files generated from Markdown posts in your Jekyll site.

> JSON is a popular cross-language method of transferring data on the web, without all the presentation layer of HTML.

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
JSON is a popular format to structure and exchange data on the web, without all the presentation layer of HTML.
```

> The files you output will be similar to a REST API in a server side language like Ruby, Python, or Node. You'll be able
> to see them directly in the browser as `/foo.json`. They can be used to build a custom frontend using Angular, React, 

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
The files you output are similar to a REST API in a server side language like Ruby, Python, or Node. You
can access them directly in your browser from e.g. `/foo.json`. They can be used to build a custom frontend using Angular, React, 
```

Vue, and so on.

A huge inspiration to write this tutorial was a [post](https://forestry.io/blog/build-a-json-api-with-hugo/) written

> by [Régis Philibert](https://forestry.io/authors/r%C3%A9gis-philibert/). It's about doing the exact same thing in

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
by [Régis Philibert](https://twitter.com/regisphilibert). It's about doing the exact same thing in
```

[Hugo](https://gohugo.io/).

I hope that this solution in Jekyll is elegant, too. You will need to define a number of [layouts]({% link _docs/layouts.md %})
and write a [plugin]({% link _docs/plugins.md %}) to convert your content to JSON. **Don't be afraid if you're not
familiar with Ruby** --- the language that Jekyll is written in. It's similar to Python, and you should get a hang of it
quickly.

By the end of the tutorial, you'll expose the following API:
* `/` --- an index of all posts
* `/{url}` --- details of a post
* `/categories` --- an index of categories
* `/categories/{category}` --- an index of posts under a category

Let's dive in!

{: .note .info}

> This solution needs a custom environment to support it's Ruby code. This means that you can't host the site on GitHub

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
This solution needs a custom environment to support its Ruby code. This means that you can't host the site on GitHub
```

Pages as-is - you'd need to use [Actions]({% link _docs/continuous-integration/github-actions.md %}) to deploy your
site. First, see if a simpler [solution](https://gist.github.com/MichaelCurrin/f8d908596276bdbb2044f04c352cb7c7)
created by [Michael Currin](https://github.com/MichaelCurrin) fits your needs.

## Setup

First, you need to go through an [installation]({% link _docs/installation.md %}) process. Having done that, you can
initialize a new Jekyll project by invoking the command `bundle exec jekyll new`. 

### Directories Structure

> You need to create the following structure:

Reviewer 5: A public repo would be nice here.
